Hey, I hope this isn't too loud for folks in the
room.
The speaker here is busted, so we can't hear.
Okay, so we're 0 for 2.
Okay, I will try to be loud while speaking into a mic.
This feels very counterintuitive.
Hi, folks.
It is nice to see all your wonderful faces.
I should start off that this is the same presentation that I
gave yesterday.
So if anyone was here yesterday, I'm very flattered.
You should probably leave because you will just be here.
Or, hey, stay.
I love the sound of my own voice.
Maybe you'll love to hear more of it, too.
This is part of the At Science Conference, and so I toss
in this little cheeky joke towards At Social Science because I
am a social scientist.
I am a PhD student at the University of Pennsylvania where I
study communications, specifically the political economy of online spaces.
When we think about some of the benefits from the At Protocol,
there are kind of two and a half real main benefits for
social science researchers.
The first one is data access.
So there is this kind of long history of, I should say
long, long within the history of internet research, concern over the access
to public social media data.
And over the last five to ten years, a lot of that
has been constricted.
Nowadays, if you're interested in understanding the kind of handful of
dominant platforms, what you end up having to do is either, in
the case of Meta, use a really clunky system that,
like, is really limited in terms of the data analysis you're
able to do and the amount of data you're able to
sample, you have to ask them for permission in order to conduct
any analysis.
So if you want to do critical analysis of TikTok, you have
to get TikTok's permission, which feels very counterintuitive.
Or they just charge you a bunch of money, like, in the
case of, uh, what was formerly known as Twitter, they charge you
an absurd amount of money that most researchers cannot afford, uh, if
you want to do things the right way.
So the first thing that's really nice about Blue Sky is
that, okay, let's put a caveat of permission spaces.
But currently, all the data is public, which means as a social
scientist, your ability to look at user behavior is really, uh, helped.
Also, uh, so for Greenwood was talking about this yesterday, but
if you want to do experiments with different algorithms, you also have
an ability in the generation of custom feeds to do some of
that testing.
What I'm interested in, though, is the ability to ask structural
questions.
And so there's a long history of, uh, media scholars looking
at how does the ownership and concentration of media systems affect the
quality of journalism, uh, the quality of conversation and reporting, um, but
then also, like, what are the kind of broader implications for democratic
theory and democracy?
And it's, a lot of folks have thought about this generally
in the context of the internet.
Uh, that is, I mean, arguably one of the reasons that Mike
Masnick wrote that piece in the first place.
But up until recently, we haven't had a lot of alternative,
uh, sources to look at.
We can go and look at the history of the 90s
and the early 2000s to get a kind of indication of
this.
But for the most part, it's been really hard to ask
these structural questions of what is a deconcentrated media
system actually look like?
And so it was in thinking of this, I was looking at
a paper, uh, called, with a great name, I was talking in
the middleware with you, uh, where some social scientists looked at
the current status of feeds, uh, starter packs, moderation lists, and labels,
and basically made the argument that most of these were run as
gift economies.
If anyone was here in the conversation earlier, um, the, the, the
PhD student from the University of Washington was making a very similar
point, which is currently feeds are mostly volunteer work, right?
Folks are putting these together because they care about community.
They're paying the hosting costs.
Now, if you've got a larger feed, um, I was talking,
uh, with Emily earlier who runs, um, uh, the astronomy feed, you
know, there are some of these that are more sustainable and sometimes
donations can be a real, uh, viable pathway.
But in that kind of long tail of feeds that are created,
oftentimes it's, you're volunteering or you just happen to care
about something specific.
Um, also supply often outstrips demand.
And it is, these do tend to be rather centralized groups where
a handful of feeds get used by a lot, large majority of
folks.
There's a long tail.
So naturally this brought me to the question of my presentation today,
which is how to centralize this blue sky.
I mean, we talk about it in the context of being this
really decentralized platform.
Um, but it's not always clear that that is the case.
Um, I want to say that I got completely nerd sniped
in this topic.
I'm going to be referencing, um, I mentioned his name yesterday,
but Cuba, uh, has put together, who is not, sadly not here,
has put together a really good dashboard that today I saw both
Rudy and Paul Frazier, uh, Paul Frazee, uh, reference
in their own.
So please go check that out.
And then eight days before this conference, uh, Lawrence came and, uh,
wrote a blog post about exactly this concern.
So I got completely, completely nerd sniped, but, um, let's
talk about it.
So there are kind of two ways you can measure decentralization.
The first is you go to the relay and you say, Hey,
can you give me all your list of users?
And then you, or you give me the list of all the
PDS's that you were querying through.
And you go to those PDS's and you say, Hey,
can you give me your list of users?
And you count that all up and you say, Hey, this is
how many people are in all these different PDS's.
You combine that, you get your number.
The challenge is that, especially for smaller data servers is not the,
they aren't often completing every part of the API.
And so you're not going to get that information fully, or
they will have, there will be a lot of, uh, PDS
's where that information is just not as clear.
So the other thing you can do, if you just assume that
most people are using, uh, D ID, uh, PLC D IDs,
uh, is you can just go through the list of exports and
you can say, Hey, uh, what does this tell me about the
current state of the network?
Because then you will see every time a new identity was created
and, uh, with what PDS it is associated.
Do that measurement?
Think about 99.
7% of the network is owned by blue sky.
So 99% of 99.
7% of users have their information stored on blue skies network.
I should say this information is a little bit out of date.
I would guess it's probably closer to like the low 99
point something's percent, but the point is that's a large
number now.
I know what everyone in this room is saying is thinking, wait,
did he really get this talk yesterday?
Why is he repeating himself?
But the thing you're also thinking is, well, this might be
technically on paper true, but maybe this doesn't reflect the actual
behavior.
Maybe the folks who are posting more are the ones who are,
uh, like who are willing to go out of their way to
self host their data.
And so if you look at that as well, you grab a
sample of the fire hose stream and you say, okay, let's
look at, uh, where folks are liking, uh, where folks are liking,
who they're following, um, and who's posting.
Maybe this will get you different numbers.
Unfortunately, that's really not the case.
Uh, followers, about 99.
9% of followers are going to folks on blue skies.
Uh, same with likes and then posts are a little bit higher
in that only 98.
9% of posts are coming from folks on blue skies servers.
Um, so this has a few issues behind it.
Um, and I want to talk about this in the language that
we so often do in blue sky, which is what if 2022
Twitter happened again?
What if an investor came in or somebody felt the need suddenly
to make a bunch of money and they want to take over
this network?
Um, how credible is our exit as users?
How sustainable is this network to that threat?
Um, the first concern, and this is one that Paul identified in
a blog post back in February, um, is that still isn't,
there's not a lot of adoption.
That's what the measuring decentralization actually gets you.
And part of that goes with these overarching questions of funding, but
also part of that is just a challenge for users, right?
Users are not always clear about the value they get from moving
their data abroad.
I think all of us understand the value of hosting your data
yourself or going to something like Euro Sky or Black Sky or
North Sky and having somebody else host your data, but that's
not always clear to users who might not be willing to adopt
it.
Um, and if you think, if you don't believe me in
that, uh, I would encourage you to do what I did a
week ago, which is I was visiting my grandparents, go to a
retirement community, try to explain the concept of blue sky to them.
Um, I do not think it will take you long to realize
why adoption might be challenging.
The second is that there is just practically a limit to what
a protocol can get you.
Protocols always exist within these kind of broader socio-technical
systems.
And so there's going to be a limit to the extent
to which a protocol actually indemnifies you against these concerns.
Um, and the third thing, this is to get, just be a
brief legal nerd for a second.
Um, blue sky is incorporated in, uh, Delaware and under Delaware law
blue sky is what's called a public benefit corporation.
Now this means that if you do some, if you can have
a mission and if you do something that's against that mission,
your shareholders can sue you for violating your mission.
That is great.
In theory, there are two problems with this.
The first one is that you don't longer, you can change
your mission at any point.
If you have over 50% of the shareholder voting, including
getting rid of your mission entirely.
And so if 50 point 50.
1% of blue sky shareholders said, Hey, actually, we don't
want to be a public benefit corporation anymore.
That could be done tomorrow.
And there's nothing any of us could do to stop it.
The second concern, and that didn't use to be a change.
That's a 2019 law change.
The second concern is that we don't know what percent of
like, we know the list of owners vaguely.
We can see the list of investors and they have posted on,
they have posted before about who owns it, but we don't
know how that breaks down percentage wise, right?
We don't know what percent of blue sky Jay owns or
Mike, very smart people.
I've met all of them today.
Very nice people, but we don't know how that actually breaks
down.
And so it's unclear if that 50.
1% number rep would have to, would represent a coalition of
most of the owners, or if that could be achieved by a
couple of investors working together.
Unfortunately, I'm also not trying to put a turn in the
punch bowl here.
So I'm going to end with a little bit of optimism.
I've seen a lot of stuff over the last couple of
days that have really inspired me, that have made me feel a
lot better about this concern, though not entirely fixed.
The first is the idea, and I know Daniel's going to
talk more about this in this talk tomorrow, of independent PLC
governance.
And so that does give you some indemnification where if
the PLC directories were wholly owned by another organization in
this kind of catastrophic platform takeover situation, maybe you could get
them, you would get those, your identities would be indemnified
against that concern, right?
So we have a different organization that controls all these identities.
In this worst case scenario, we at least have a third party
who we can go to and say, "Hey, blue sky's trying
to fuck us all over, let's fix that issue." The second
concern with that is even if you get your identity migrated over,
you still have this concern about data ownership.
And that's where projects like Hubble are really valuable if we
get this public copy of all the data on the platform.
That way if you move, you have a third party in the
independent PLC organization that would give you your identity back, and
then using the data backups somebody could put together a tool to
recover your data.
And this gets a little bit more complicated because of permission spaces,
but if anyone here is technical and wants to think about how
you could under the new permission space structure, you could help people
set up their own backups, please talk to me.
I think that's a great idea.
Third is the rise of community PDSs like Euro Sky,
Black Sky, North Sky, all those wonderful folks, which are really promising.
The more we can encourage adoption of these third party things, the
better.
And last but not least, because I realize I'm getting close
to time, is the broader community.
It has been a really inspiring few days talking to everyone here.
I've had a lot of wonderful conversations.
After I gave this talk yesterday, I was surrounded by the mob
of three different blue sky engineers who threatened to break my knees.
I'm kidding.
They did not.
But everybody is equally as concerned about this, and folks are working
really hard.
And I would just say that there is a limit to what
we can do technically, but what we can do technically is still
really important, because what we have to do is we have to
decrease the lift on users to adopt these alternatives, but we also
have to reduce the burden and increase their incentive to do so.
And I will leave you with a quote from Lawrence who totally
nerd sniped me.
Thank you.